Manual instrumentation: per-core scope rings
Measured 2026-09-02T01:51:33Z on Linux 7.0.0-30-generic, 32 threads.
Commit: 29b0c754d

Write path, taken apart (release build, single thread, release build)
Three runs, medians; from tests/cost.rs.

  owned ring, no clock       6.3 ns    load cursor, store payload, publish
  owned ring + clock        14.1 ns    what an instrumented scope costs
  shared ring, no clock      9.8 ns    the same, with an atomic claim
  shared ring + clock       16.2 ns
  clock read alone           9.3 ns    66% of a real scope
  atomic fetch_add           4.4 ns
  plain increment            0.2 ns
  atomic premium             4.3 ns    what the owned path avoids

  The owned path is the portable one: a thread takes a ring for its lifetime,
  so there is one producer and the cursor needs a load and a store rather than
  a read-modify-write. It saves 3.5 ns of ring cost -- close to the whole
  4.3 ns atomic premium that rseq would have removed, and without a line of
  assembly or a dependency on Linux.

  Growing the record from 32 to 48 bytes to carry inline names cost 2.1 ns in
  isolation and nothing in the real path: the extra stores hide under the
  clock read's latency on an out-of-order core.

  An earlier run reported "98 million events/s, 10.2 ns each" and attributed
  about half of it to the clock. That was wrong: the benchmark pushed a
  pre-built event with a constant timestamp and never read the clock.

  Reproduce:
    cargo test -p orbit-scope-ring --release --test cost -- --nocapture

Robustness against a dead producer

  There is no CAS loop anywhere in the design, so there is nothing to spin in:
  the claim is a single wait-free fetch_add that always succeeds first try.
  The hazard is on the other side. A producer killed between claiming a slot
  and publishing it leaves a slot that never commits, and a consumer that
  waits for it stalls that ring's frontier -- and the horizon is the minimum
  across every ring, so the whole stream stops. Permanently, and silently.

  The consumer decides by *liveness*, not by a timeout. If the producing
  process is gone, nothing it claimed can ever be published, so the claim is
  written off immediately, counted as dropped, and stepped over.

  A timeout was tried first -- 250 ms, on the theory that no live producer
  could exceed it. That was wrong, and the counter-examples are all things
  that happen more often while profiling, not less: a thread stopped at a
  debugger breakpoint, a cgroup that has spent its CPU quota, a major page
  fault under memory pressure, a guest descheduled by its hypervisor. Any of
  them outlasts 250 ms easily, and throwing away the events of a process that
  is alive and about to publish them is the profiler corrupting its own
  measurement.

  A 30-second backstop remains, not as a timeout but as a bound on the
  unforeseen -- a recycled pid answering the liveness question wrongly, say.
  It will never fire in normal operation.

  Worth recording: a false positive costs lost events, never corruption. The
  seq stamp is re-read after the payload, so a producer waking late and
  writing into a slot the consumer has already stepped past is detected rather
  than mistaken for live data.

  Four tests: a dead producer releases the stream at once; a live one stalled
  for a full second keeps its event and delivers it on waking; the backstop
  fires; and the default entry point assumes life.

Isolation: one segment per process, and one merge per process

  Each instrumented process owns /dev/shm/orbit-scopes-<pid> and the rings in
  it. A process that dies mid-write, or stops at a breakpoint, stalls only its
  own rings. The merge stays inside one segment for the same reason: a global
  horizon is the minimum across every input, so breakpointing one process
  would freeze every other process's timeline.

  Nothing needs a global order. Scope nesting is matched within a thread by
  (tid, scope_id), the viewer lanes by pid, and events carry absolute
  CLOCK_MONOTONIC timestamps, so processes interleave correctly on the
  timeline however they arrive.

Considered and rejected: one ring per process

  A single multi-producer ring per process gets the same isolation with less
  machinery. Measured on 32 threads, ns per claim:

    threads        1 ring     128 rings      ratio
          1           5.1           5.0       1.0x
          2          10.0           2.5       4.0x
          4          10.6           1.4       7.3x
          8          13.0           0.7      18.3x
         16          11.4           0.6      20.3x
         32          12.8           0.4      36.3x

  The number that decides it is not the ratio but the shape of the first
  column: with one ring the per-claim cost stops falling as threads are added,
  because the cursor is a serialisation point. That caps a process at roughly
  78 million events a second however many cores it has, and nearly triples the
  claim cost of every individual scope. Sharding is what keeps the profiler
  from becoming the bottleneck in the thing it is measuring.

Sizing

One rule picks a ring, with no fast path and no fallback. An earlier version
  handed out exclusive rings while any were free and sent the rest to a shared
  pool; that was two policies wearing one name, since with bounded rings and
  unbounded threads sharing is guaranteed by pigeonhole. Hashing is also
  stateless, which matters more: a claim must be released when a thread exits,
  and this code lives inside somebody else's application where a thread-local
  destructor may run late or not at all.

  The hash is a 64-bit golden-ratio multiply taking the high bits, never
  `tid % ring_count`. Thread ids are not arbitrary: Windows hands them out in
  multiples of four, and this code compiles into the profiled application. On
  multiples of four, `tid % 8` reaches two rings of eight and leaves six idle;
  there is a test asserting exactly that as the counter-example, and another
  checking even spread at strides of 1, 4, 16 and 4096.

  Measured on this machine, Linux tids stride by 1 (sequential and concurrent
  creation both), so the defence is for the platforms the producer will be
  compiled into rather than for this one.

  Ring count is derived from expected threads, not from cores: rings follow
  threads, and a process routinely has more threads than the machine has
  cores. Sizing by cores would have put the excess on the shared ring.

  Slots per ring are derived from a total budget rather than chosen, because
  the number a profiled process cares about is what the segment costs it:

    128 rings x 1024 slots x 64 B = 8.0 MiB

  At 16384 slots -- the figure from when rings were per-core and there were
  only as many as cores -- 128 rings would have been 128 MiB, which is not a
  reasonable thing to ask of a process for agreeing to be profiled.

Layout
  event                    48 bytes (28 fixed + 20 inline name bytes)
  slot                     64 bytes (one cache line: seq + pending_ns + event,
                           exactly, with no padding left)
  ring control block       64 bytes (one cache line, so neighbours never share)
  rings                    128, chosen by ring_for_thread(tid); threads share
                           whenever there are more of them than rings
  default slots per ring   1024 (64 KiB), derived from the budget below
  default total budget     8 MiB for the whole segment

Write path instruction budget, per event, on an owned ring:
  1 x relaxed load         read the cursor (nobody else writes it)
  6 x plain 64-bit store   the payload
  1 x release store        commit the slot
  1 x release store        publish the cursor, after the commit, so a consumer
                           never sees an unfinished slot
  no atomic read-modify-write, no lock, no allocation, no syscall

  On the shared overflow ring, add one relaxed fetch_add to claim the slot and
  one release store to announce the timestamp.

Tests
  test result: ok. 21 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.00s
  test result: ok. 3 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.05s
  test result: ok. 0 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.00s

Not measured, and why
  Cross-process throughput. The shared-memory path is exercised by a
  writer and reader in one process; a second process mapping the same
  segment is the next step, together with the C API that fills it.
